# 2.1 Docker Images

In this section, we'll dive into the world of Docker images—how to create them, work with Dockerfiles, and follow best practices for efficient image creation.

## 2.1.1 Fundamental Components of a Docker Image

#### 1. Base Image:

- The base image is the starting point for your Docker image.
- It provides the basic operating system and runtime environment for your application.
- Common base images include Alpine Linux, Ubuntu, CentOS, and others.
  ```Dockerfile
  FROM alpine:3.14
  ```

#### 2. Filesystem Snapshot:

- Docker images are composed of layers, and each layer represents a set of filesystem changes.
- The filesystem snapshot includes the application code, libraries, dependencies, and any other files necessary for the application to run.
- Organize your application files, ensuring they are copied into the Docker image during the build.
  ```Dockerfile
  WORKDIR /app
  COPY . /app
  ```

#### 3. Application Code:

- The actual code and application files that are needed to run your application.
- These files are typically copied into the Docker image during the build process.

#### 4. Dependencies and Libraries:

- Any libraries, packages, or dependencies required by your application should be included in the Docker image.
- This ensures that the image is self-contained and can run independently on any system that supports Docker.

#### 5. Environment Variables:

- Environment variables can be set in the Dockerfile or passed during container runtime.
- They allow you to configure aspects of your application, such as database connection strings or other runtime parameters.
  ```Dockerfile
  ENV DATABASE_URL="your_database_url"
  ```

#### 6. Container Configuration:

- Configuration files specific to the containerized environment.
- These files may include settings for the application, runtime parameters, and other configurations needed for the containerized environment.
  ```bash
  /app
  ├── Dockerfile
  ├── config
  │   └── app_config.yaml
  └── ...
  ```

#### 7. Ports and Exposed Network Services:

- Docker images can specify which ports should be exposed for communication.
- This is crucial for allowing communication between the containerized application and the external world.
  ```Dockerfile
  EXPOSE 8080
  ```

#### 8. Entrypoint or CMD:

- The ENTRYPOINT or CMD instruction in the Dockerfile specifies the command to run when the container starts.
  ```Dockerfile
  CMD ["python3", "app.py"]
  ```

#### 9. Metadata:

- Docker images can include metadata, such as labels, to provide additional information about the image.
- This metadata can include version information, maintainer details, and other annotations.
  ```Dockerfile
  LABEL version="1.0" \
  maintainer="Your Name"
  ```

## 2.1.2 Writing Dockerfile

To create a Docker image, you'll need to define a Dockerfile.

```dockerfile
# 1. FROM: Specifies the base image (Node.js in this case).
FROM node:14

# 2. WORKDIR: Sets the working directory inside the container.
WORKDIR /usr/src/app

# 3. COPY: Copies files from the host to the container.
COPY . .

# 4. RUN: Executes commands during the build process.
RUN npm install

# 5. ENV: Sets environment variables.
ENV NODE_ENV=production

# 6. EXPOSE: Exposes a port for communication.
EXPOSE 3000

# 7. LABEL: Sets metadata for the image. (Optional)
LABEL version="1.0" \
      description="My Node.js App" \
      maintainer="Your Name"

# 8. CMD: Defines the default command to run when the container starts.
CMD ["npm", "start"]
```

Let's break down the Dockerfile:

- `FROM`: Specifies the base image (Node.js in this case).
- `WORKDIR`: Sets the working directory inside the container.
- `COPY`: Copies files from the host to the container.
- `RUN`: Executes commands during the build process.
- `EXPOSE`: Exposes a port for communication.
- `CMD`: Defines the default command to run when the container starts.

## 2.1.3 Creating or Building and Running Docker images

Once you have created your Dockerfile, the next steps involve building the Docker image and running containers based on that image.

#### 1. Build the Docker Image

- Use the `docker build` command to build or create your Docker image.
- Open a terminal, navigate to the directory containing your Dockerfile and application code, and run:

```Dockerfile
docker build -t your-image-name .
```

- `docker build`: This is the command to build a Docker image.

- `-t your-image-name`: This option allows you to specify a name and optional tag for your image.
- The format is typically `name:tag`. The tag is optional but is often used to version your images.

- `.`: This indicates the build context, which is the current directory. It tells Docker where to find the Dockerfile and any files you want to copy into the image.

#### 2. Run a Docker Container

Once the image is built, you can run a container based on that image using the `docker run` command:

```Dockerfile
docker run -d -p 3000:3000 your-image-name
```

- `docker run`: This is the command to run a Docker container.
- `-d`: This option runs the container in the background (detached mode).
- `-p 3000:3000`: This option maps port 3000 on the host to port 3000 on the container.
- `your-image-name`: Replace this with the name of the Docker image

## 2.1.4 Best practices for creating efficient images

Creating efficient Docker images involves optimizing both image size and build performance. In this section, we'll explore best practices to enhance the quality and efficiency of Docker images.

1. **Minimize Layers:**

   - Reduce the number of layers in your Dockerfile to minimize the image size. Each instruction adds a layer, so combining related commands can lead to fewer layers.

2. **Use a Minimal Base Image:**

   - Choose a minimal base image to build upon. Alpine Linux and other lightweight distributions are often suitable for reducing the overall image size.

3. **Multi-Stage Builds:**

   - Implement multi-stage builds to create smaller final images. Use separate build stages to compile dependencies and copy only necessary artifacts to the final stage.

4. **Leverage Caching Effectively:**

   - Understand how Docker caching works and structure your Dockerfile to leverage caching efficiently. Place frequently changing instructions towards the end of the file.

5. **Remove Unnecessary Dependencies:**

   - Only include dependencies required for runtime. Remove unnecessary files and packages to decrease the image size.

6. **Optimize Dockerfile Order:**

   - Prioritize frequently changing instructions at the end of the Dockerfile to maximize caching benefits. This includes steps like copying application code.

7. **Use Specific Tags:**

   - Specify version tags for base images and dependencies to ensure reproducibility. Avoid using generic tags like `latest` for stability.

8. **Clean Up Unnecessary Files:**

   - Remove temporary files and artifacts generated during the build process. This ensures that the final image only contains essential components.

9. **Combine Commands with &&:**

   - Combine multiple commands using `&&` to reduce the number of layers and avoid creating unnecessary intermediate images.

10. **Label Your Images:**
    - Add metadata labels to your images for documentation and organizational purposes. Labels can include information about the build process, maintainer details, or version information.

[← Previous](../Module-1/1.3_Creating_your_first_Docker_container.md) || [Index](../README.md) || [Next→](./2.2_Docker_Registries.md)
