# 1.3 Creating your first Docker container

In this section, you'll learn how to create and run your first Docker container.

## 1.3.1 Building and Running first Docker Container

#### 1. Find a project

- ToDo Project in Node.js, clone it in your machine.
  ```bash
  git clone https://github.com/faizan35/todo-app-node.git
  ```

#### 2. **Dockerfile**

- Inside the project dir.

  ```bash
  touch Dockerfile
  ```

- Dockerfiles as scripts containing instructions to build a Docker image. Write script into the file.

  ```Dockerfile
  # base image with node js
  FROM node:18.18-alpine

  # Working dir with all the code
  WORKDIR /app

  # Copy code src to des
  COPY . .

  # Install packages
  RUN npm install

  # app is ready

  # Run the container with args
  CMD ["node","app.js"]
  ```

#### 3. Build the Docker Image

- Open a terminal, navigate to the directory containing your Dockerfile, and run:
  ```bash
  docker build -t node-app .
  ```

#### 4. Run the Container

- Once the image is built, you can run a container based on that image:
  ```bash
  docker run -d -p 3000:3000 node-app:latest
  ```
- The `-d` flag runs the container in the background (detached mode), and `-p` maps a port on your host machine to a port in the container.

#### 5. View Running Containers

- To see a list of running containers, use:
  ```bash
  docker ps
  ```

#### 6. Stop and Remove Containers

- To stop a running container, use:
  ```bash
  docker stop container_id_or_name
  ```
  - To see a list of stoped containers, use:
    ```bash
    docker ps -a
    ```
- To remove a container, use:

  ```bash
  docker rm container_id_or_name
  ```

## 1.3.2. Running containers with different options

#### 1. Run in the Background:

- `docker run -d image_name:tag`: Run a container in the background (detached mode).

#### 2. Name the Container:

- `docker run --name custom_container_name image_name:tag`: Assign a custom name to the container.

#### 3. Map Ports:

- `docker run -p host_port:container_port image_name:tag`: Map a port on your host machine to a port in the container.

#### 4. Set Environment Variables:

- `docker run -e KEY=VALUE image_name:tag`: Set environment variables in the container.

#### 5. Specify a Volume:

- `docker run -v /host/path:/container/path image_name:tag`: Mount a volume from the host machine to the container.

#### 6. Run Interactive Shell:

- `docker run -it image_name:tag /bin/bash`: Run an interactive shell inside the container.

#### 7. Set Resource Limits:

- `docker run --memory=512m --cpus=0.5 image_name:tag`: Limit container resources (memory and CPU).

#### 8. Run a One-Time Command:

- `docker run image_name:tag command_to_run`: Execute a specific command in the container.

#### 9. Remove Container on Exit:

- `docker run --rm image_name:tag`: Remove the container automatically when it exits.

#### 10. Attach to Container's STDIN, STDOUT, and STDERR:

- `docker run -a stdin -a stdout -a stderr -i -t image_name:tag`: Attach to the container's standard input, output, and error streams.

## 1.3.3. Managing container lifecycle

#### 1. Create a Container:

- `docker create image_name:tag`: Create a container based on a specific image without starting it.

#### 2. Start a Container:

- `docker start container_id_or_name`: Start a stopped container.

#### 3. Run a Container (Create and Start):

- `docker run image_name:tag`: Create and start a container based on a specific image.

#### 4. Stop a Running Container:

- `docker stop container_id_or_name`: Gracefully stop a running container.

#### 5. Forcefully Stop a Running Container:

- `docker kill container_id_or_name`: Forcefully stop a running container.

#### 6. Restart a Container:

- `docker restart container_id_or_name`: Restart a container.

#### 7. Pause a Running Container:

- `docker pause container_id_or_name`: Pause the processes in a running container.

#### 8. Unpause a Paused Container:

- `docker unpause container_id_or_name`: Unpause a paused container.

#### 9. Remove a Stopped Container:

- `docker rm container_id_or_name`: Remove a stopped container.

#### 10. Remove a Running Container:

- `docker rm -f container_id_or_name`: Forcefully remove a running container.

#### 11. Inspect Container Details:

- `docker inspect container_id_or_name`: Get detailed information about a container.

#### 12. View Container Logs:

- `docker logs container_id_or_name`: View the logs of a container.

#### 13. Attach to a Running Container:

- `docker attach container_id_or_name`: Attach to the standard input, output, and error streams of a running container.

#### 14. Exec into a Running Container:

- `docker exec -it container_id_or_name /bin/bash`: Open an interactive terminal inside a running container.

#### 15. Rename a Container:

- `docker rename old_container_name new_container_name`: Rename a container.

#### 16. Copy Files Between Host and Container:

- `docker cp /host/path container_id_or_name:/container/path`: Copy files between the host and a container.

#### 17. Update Container Resource Limits:

- `docker update --cpus=0.5 --memory=512m container_id_or_name`: Update container resource limits.

#### 18. Commit Changes to a New Image:

- `docker commit container_id_or_name new_image_name:tag`: Create a new image from changes made in a container.

[← Previous](./1.2_Installing_Docker_on_your_local_machine.md) || [Index](../README.md) || [Next→](../Module-2/2.1_Docker_Images.md)
